The task of monitoring people’s opinion towards
particular targets in political topics or public life
debates has grown in the last decade, thus leading
to the creation of a specific area of investigation
in NLP named Stance Detection (SD). Research
on this topic, indeed, might have an impact on
different aspects of everyone’s life such as public administration, policy-making, advertisement,
marketing strategies and security. In fact, through
the constant monitoring of people’s opinion, desires, complaints and beliefs on political agenda or
public services, administrators could better meet
population’s needs (Küçük and Can, 2020).
SD, as a task, shares various similarities with
Sentiment Analysis (SA), and, exactly like Sentiment Analysis, also SD has been applied in several
domains. For instance, to discover the reputation of
an enterprise, what is the general public thought regarding a political reform, if costumers of a fashion
brand are happy about the customer service, etc...
Nevertheless, whereas the aim of SA is categorizing texts according to a notion of polarity (positive,
negative or neutral), the aim of SD consists in classifying texts according to the attitude they express
towards a given target of interest (Mohammad et al.,
2017).
The first shared task entirely dedicated to SD
was held for English at SemEval in 2016, i.e., Task
6 “Detecting Stance in Tweets” (Mohammad et al.,
2016). In the following years, many more shared
tasks followed tackling the same issue in different
languages and regarding different targets: Chinese
(Xu et al., 2016), Spanish and Catalan (Taulé et al.,
2017, 2018), Italian (Cignarella et al., 2020b), and
lastly Spanish and Basque (Agerri et al., 2021).
Provided that several approaches based on different types of linguistic knowledge have been applied
to address the SD task, in this paper we investigate
the contribution of syntactic information and in
particular that provided by dependency relations.
Therefore, we exploit some of the datasets made
available in the above-mentioned evaluation campaigns in different languages. In particular, we
aimed at answering the following research question:
RQ: Do features derived from morphology and syntax help automatic systems to address the task of
stance detection?
Indeed, some research already explored different kinds of syntactic features and their interaction in several NLP tasks, showing their effectiveness. For example, Sidorov et al. (2012) exploited
syntactic dependency-based n-grams for generalpurpose classification tasks, Socher et al. (2013)
investigated sentiment and syntax with to the development of a sentiment treebank, and Kanayama
and Iwamoto (2020) showed a pipeline method
that makes the most of syntactic structures based
on Universal Dependencies (UD1
), achieving high
precision in sentiment analysis for 17 languages.
Morphology and syntax have also been proved useful in a number of other tasks, such as rumour
detection (Ghanem et al., 2019), authorship attribution (Posadas-Duran et al., 2014; Sidorov et al.,
2014) and humor recognition (Liu et al., 2018). To
the best of our knowledge there is no prior work
exploiting dependency-based syntactic features for
addressing the task of Stance Detection.

The lesson learned form this work suggests that
morphosyntactic cues combine well as features in
classical machine learning algorithms, but they do
not seem to provide an increment in terms of performance in the neural architecture of M-BERT
in the case study of multilingual Stance Detection.
Indeed, as shown in linguistics, the expression of
one’s stance is frequently a phenomenon that seems
to depend more often on semantics rather than on
syntactic patterns or constructions.