Reading puts the unfolding of linguistic input in
the hands—or, really, the eyes—of the reader. Consequently, it presents a unique opportunity to gain
a better understanding of how humans comprehend
written language. The rate at which humans choose
to read text (and process its information) should
be determined by their goal of understanding
it. Ergo, examining where a reader spends their
time should help us to understand the nature of
language comprehension processes themselves.
Indeed, studies analyzing reading times have been
employed to explore a number of psycholinguistic
theories (e.g., Smith and Levy, 2013; Futrell et al.,
2020; Van Schijndel and Linzen, 2021).
One behavior revealed by such studies is the
tendency for humans to spend more time1 on
the last word of a sentence or clause. While the
existence of such wrap-up effects is well-known
(Just et al., 1982; Hill and Murray, 2000; Rayner
et al., 2000; Camblin et al., 2007), the cognitive
processes giving rise to them are still not fully
understood. This is likely (at least in part) due
to the dearth of analyses targeting naturalistic
sentence-final reading behavior. First, most studies
of online processing omit data from these words
to explicitly control for the confounding factors
wrap-up effects introduce (e.g., Smith and Levy,
2013; Goodkind and Bicknell, 2018). Second,
the few studies on wrap-up effects rely on small
datasets, none of which analyze naturalistic text
(Just and Carpenter, 1980; Rayner et al., 2000;
Kuperberg et al., 2011). This work addresses this
gap, using several large corpora of reading time
data. Specifically, we study whether informationtheoretic concepts (such as surprisal) provide
insights into the cognitive processes that occur
at a sentence’s boundary. Notedly, informationtheoretic approaches have been proven effective for
analyzing sentence-medial reading time behavior.
We follow the long line of work that has
connected information-theoretic measures and
psychometric data (Frank et al., 2015; Goodkind
and Bicknell, 2018; Wilcox et al., 2020; Meister
et al., 2021 , inter alia), employing similar methods
to build models of sentence- and clause-final RTs.
Using surprisal estimates from state-of-the-art language models, we search for a link between wrapup effects and the information content within a
sentence. We find that the distribution of surprisals
of prior context is often predictive of sentence- and
clause-final reading times (RTs), while not adding
significant predictive power to models of sentencemedial RTs. This result suggests that the nature
of cognitive processes involved during the reading
of these boundary words may indeed be different
than those at other positions. Such findings lend
support to several prior hypotheses regarding
which processes may underlie wrap-up effects
(e.g., the resolution of prior ambiguities) while
providing evidence against other speculations (e.g.,
that the time spent at sentence boundaries can be
quantified with a constant factor, independent of
the processing difficulty of the text itself).
We attempt to shed light on the nature of wrap-up
effects by exploring the relationship between
clause-final RTs and information-theoretic attributes of text. We find that operationalizations
of the information contained in the preceding
context lead to better predictions of these RTs,
while not adding significant predictive power
for sentence-medial RTs. This suggests that
information-theoretic attributes of text can shed
light on the cognitive processes happening during
the comprehension of clause-final words. Further,
these processes may indeed be different in nature
than those required for sentence-medial words.
In short, our results provide evidence (either in
support or against) about several theories of the
nature of wrap-up processes.