With the growing interest in the human-computer
interface, emotions are considered for listing differences between machines and living beings. Humans’ inherent knowledge of these emotions is
hard to pass on to machines. Hence, the introduced
WASSA 2022 shared task of Empathy Detection,
Emotion Classification, and Personality Detection
is challenging. Although some research has been
done by Gibson et al. (2015) and Khanpour et al.
(2017), they have several important shortcomings,
such as the simplistic definition of empathy and the
lack of these corpora in the public domain.
The WASSA 2022 Shared Task consists of the
following four major sub-tasks:
• Track 1: Empathy Prediction (EMP): predict
both the empathy concern and the personal
distress scores at the essay-level
• Track 2: Emotion Classification (EMO): categorize an essay into the correct emotion class
• Track 3: Personality Prediction (PER): predict the personality of an author across five
primary personality traits.
• Track 4: Interpersonal Reactivity Index Prediction (IRI): predict the four primary aspects
of empathy of an author.
In our approach, we have used a pre-trained language model to extract the features from the textual
input (essay) and develop - (A). a multi-task system
to predict empathic concern and personal distress
score jointly (for Track 1), (B). a multi-task system
that categorizes an essay into appropriate emotion
class and also detects the presence or absence of
empathy and distress in it. For tracks 3 and 4, we
solely consider the demographic information in
the dataset to predict various personality traits and
interpersonal reactivity index scores.
This paper presents our approaches to address
the various tasks introduced in the WASSA 2022
shared task for empathy detection, emotion classification, and personality detection. To exploit
the commonality among correlated tasks such as
empathy and distress and emotion with empathy
and distress, we developed multi-task systems built
on pre-trained BERT models for - (A) empathy
and distress detection tasks; (B). emotion classification (primary task) and empathy and distress
classification (auxiliary tasks). We also presented
SVM algorithms trained on various demographic
features to predict personality traits and interpersonal reactivity index scores. We empirically observed how jointly learning correlated tasks such as
empathy and distress, emotion with empathy and
distress, helps to improve overall system performance. Our developed systems achieved average
Pearson scores of 0.483, 0.05, and 0.08 for Track 1,
3 and 4, respectively, and a macro F1 score of 0.524
for Track 2 on the test set. We ranked 8th, 11th, 2nd
and 2nd for the tracks 1, 2, 3 and 4 respectively.
We want to improve our multi-tasking-based systems in the future by adding lexicon features from
available lexical resources alongside textual input
for the EMP and EMO tasks. We also want to
develop an effective technique for combining contextual information from an author’s essays with
demographic data to predict PER and IRI scores.