1 Introduction
Empathy and Distress are quite important regarding human health. Emotion classification in natural
languages has been studied for over two decades,
and many applications successfully used emotion
as their principal component. Empathy utterances
can be emotional. Therefore, examining emotion
in text-based empathy has a significant impact on
predicting empathy. Empathic concern and personal distress are empathic responses that may result when observing someone in discomfort (Fabi
et al., 2019). Some news stories are also displayed
in this task, and people have reacted to them. The
news is disturbing or discomforting to some people. And hence, regarding that, their empathy and
distress are noted. This paper presents the WASSA
2022 Shared Task: Predicting Empathy and Emotion in Reaction to News Stories. This shared task
included four individual tasks where teams developed models to predict Emotions, empathy, and
personality in essays in which people expressed
their empathy and distress in reaction to news articles in which an individual or a group of people
were harmed. Additionally, the dataset also included the demographic information of the authors
of the essays, such as age, gender, ethnicity, income, education level, and personality information.
The shared task consisted of four tracks (optional):
Track 1: Empathy Prediction (EMP) task consists
of predicting both the empathy concern and the
personal distress. (Evaluation based on an average
of Pearson correlation (Benesty et al., 2009) of empathy and distress).
Track 2: Emotion Classification (EMO) consists
of predicting the emotion (sadness, joy, disgust,
surprise, anger, or fear, taken from the six basic
emotions (Ekman and Friesen, 1971) also including neutral) at the essay-level (Evaluation based on
the macro F1-score).
Track 3: Personality Prediction (PER), which
consists in predicting the personality of the essay
writer, knowing all their essays and the news article from which they reacted (Evaluation based on
the average of Pearson correlation over Personality
values (Komarraju et al., 2011) - conscientiousness,
Openness, Extraversion, Agreeableness, and Stability).
Track 4: Interpersonal Reactivity Index Prediction (IRI) consists of predicting the personality of
the essay writer. (Evaluation based on an average
of Pearson correlation over IRI values - fantasy,
perspective taking, empathetic concern, personal
distress).
We participated in only the first two tasks.
6 Conclusion
This paper describes our submission to the WASSA
2022 shared task, where we have used the already
trained RoBERTa model on a large dataset and
then used its power by just finetuning on the given
dataset. By the approach we have used, it can also
be deduced that text augmentation and upsampling
helped in emotion classification and predicting the
empathy and distress scores as most of the time, the
larger amount of data helps improve the training
process of a model.