As a salient part of argument mining (AM), the
analysis of dialogical argumentation has received
increasing research attention (Morio and Fujita,
2018; Chakrabarty et al., 2019; Ji et al., 2021;
Cheng et al., 2021; Yuan et al., 2021). Argument
pair extraction (APE), proposed by Cheng et al.
(2020), is a new task within this field that focuses
on extracting interactive argument pairs from two
interrelated documents (e.g., peer reviewer and rebuttal). Figure 1 presents an example of APE where
two interrelated documents are segmented into arguments and non-arguments at sentence level. Two
arguments from different documents that discuss
the same issues are regarded as an argument pair.
Previous works (Cheng et al., 2020, 2021) commonly address APE by decomposing it into two
sentence-level subtasks, i.e., a sequence labeling
task and a sentence relation classification task.
These methods identify arguments by sentencelevel sequence labeling and determine whether two
sentences belong to the same argument pair by
sentence relation classification. Afterwards, the
argument pairs are inferred indirectly by certain
rules combining the results of the two subtasks.
However, such a paradigm only considers sentencelevel relations, while the holistic argument-level
relations can not be well modeled.
In this paper, we argue that APE can be considered as a multi-turn machine reading comprehension (MRC) task with two phases, i.e., an AM
phase and an APE phase. Specifically, in the first
turn, a special AM query is employed to identify
all the arguments in the first document (AM phase).
Afterwards, in each subsequent turn, every identified argument is treated as an APE query to extract
its paired arguments from the second document
(APE phase). Similarly, this process can also be
performed in another direction, that is, using the
arguments identified in the second document as
queries to extract the paired arguments from the
first document. We train these two phases jointly
in a single MRC model, allowing them to benefit
each other. By considering arguments as queries,
our proposed MRC framework can better capture
the interactions between each query argument and
the queried document, thus extracting the argument
pairs at the argument level. In addition, considering the long length of the documents, we utilize
Longformer (Beltagy et al., 2020) to model longer
contexts.
We evaluate our method on the large benchmark
dataset (Cheng et al., 2020). Results show that our
proposed method significantly outperforms the current state-of-the-art method by 7.11% in F1 score.
In this paper, we propose to frame the argument
pair extraction (APE) task as a machine reading
comprehension (MRC) task. Our MRC framework
addresses APE through two phases with two types
of queries, that is, argument mining (AM) query
and argument pair extraction (APE) query. Our
proposed method can better model the argumentlevel interactions, thus facilitating the extraction
of argument pairs. Experimental results on a large
benchmark dataset demonstrate that our proposed
method achieves state-of-the-art performance.