Classifier and measure word systems are common
across the world’s languages. While they are the
most common and most associated with Southeast
and East Asia, they are also present in some languages of South Asia, Australia, the Pacific, and the
Americas among others (Aikhenvald, 2000). Systems vary language-to-language, but share some
general properties. They divide up the space of
nouns along some semantic space, often encoding
lexical semantic information including animacy,
concreteness, and size and shape categories. For
example, Mandarin has classifiers for long objects
(e.g., tiáo 條), some animals (zh¯ı 隻), and vehicles (liàng 輛). On the other hand, some classifiers
like the Mandarin general classifier gè 個 do not
seem to pick out anything in particular, or they instead pick out extremely narrow, almost lexicalized
classes, such as zun¯ 尊, which as a classifier applies only to certain colossal metal objects such
as cannons and Buddhist statues (Gao and Malt,
2009).
Compared to most inflectional noun class systems, classifiers are more subject to variable discourse conditions. Several classifiers may be used
grammatically with a given noun as conditions allow. For example, ‘a goat’ may be expressed with
the animal classifier zh¯ı or general classifier gè,
but also tiáo or tóu 頭 used for livestock (Erbaugh,
1986). The balance of semantic specificity, arbitrariness, and variability presents a challenge for
native learners. How do individuals acquire both
the semantic conditions and arbitrary lexical patterns of classifier systems?
Parallel to this, classifier systems are subject to
constant change, both for language-internal reasons
(e.g., grammaticalization of new classifiers, word
death of old classifiers) and external ones, particularly contact (Aikhenvald, 2000). Erbaugh (1986)
illustrates a few cases of changes in classifier usage
in Mandarin and its ancestors over the past 3500
years. Gè 個, the overwhelming majority catch-all
classifier in the modern language only gained this
status during the Qing Dynasty (CE 1644-1912).
For the millennium prior since the Tang dynasty,
méi 枚 had been the default, but it has since been
relegated to a niche classifier for small needle and
badge-like objects. Both gè and méi began as niche
classifiers in their respective eras before gradually
generalizing. In a similar vein, Habibi et al. (2020)
explore how linguistic categories change through
chaining, via the usage of Mandarin Chinese classifiers in the past half century. The latter two studies
discuss the development of Mandarin classifiers
over time. They are based on careful research, but
they are also limited to a single language. Erbaugh
(1986) in particular stops short of a quantitative
assessment.
We provide a computational analysis of diachronic trends in classifier systems which complements prior developmental and historical research. We approach the problem in two ways.
First, we present a quantitative analysis of classifiers in Cantonese and Mandarin child-directed
speech to investigate the possibility of a functional
role for classifiers as disambiguators which could
influence the direction of child-driven change. Second, we model a simulated classifier system using
a population-level transmission model to determine
how language acquisition may drive trends in classifier patterns over time. We find support for input
sparsity and learning, without reference to specific
functional concerns, as a primary driver for gradual
classifier generalization over time.
Erbaugh (2006) remarked that within noun categorization broadly, classifier systems exist somewhere
in-between unmarked common nouns and grammatical systems like gender. They therefore balance semantic specificity with variance that tends
toward arbitrary. We believe, and have sought to
show in this paper, this follows from a view of language change that is primarily driven by children
acquiring their native languages with additional
changes led by adults. This dual perspective provides a place for both grammar learning and sociolinguistic discourse factors as mechanisms for
change. Classifier systems are a natural juncture
for these two types of change since they are both
deeply embedded in the grammar and show heavy
optionality, variability, and discourse sensitivity.
Existing “somewhere in-between” then plausibly
stems from the diffusion of innovation in learning
and discourse, clarifying that child-driven change
to classifier systems is neutral with respect to function.