1 Introduction
In a conversational scenario, the tone of voice used
by interlocutors is a key aspect towards achieving
fruitful, engaging, and natural user-agent interactions (Brown et al., 1987; Niu and Bansal, 2018).
This is deeply rooted in the fact that discoursing in
a polite manner, is a social trait of human conversations, that when left unattended by dialog agents,
can lead to an immediate perception of artificial
discourse and lack of intelligent behavior, which in
turn leads to poor engagement.
Task-oriented dialog agents require simultaneously keeping the user engaged while achieving the
task goal, whether it is selling a product, booking a
restaurant or simply providing assistance. This requires informative and correct answers, embedding
domain-specific language, while keeping a polite
tone of voice. Being able to accomplish this, has
an impact that extrapolates isolated conversations.
For example, in the fashion world, the tone and the
way the customer is addressed are strongly linked
to the brand culture (Sousa et al., 2021) (e.g. more
eloquent vs. more casual and youthful discourse).
While politeness is a deeply seeded cultural concept and difficult to fully generalize (Meier, 1995),
it has been recently approached from a computational perspective (Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil et al.,
2013; Niu and Bansal, 2018; Madaan et al., 2020)
under the framework of (Brown et al., 1987), which
divides politeness strategies in a) negative politeness - where polite discourse is achieved by expressing restraint, thus avoiding being direct - and
b) positive politeness - where an explicit attempt
of expressing solidarity, optimism and gratitude is
made. Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil et al. (2013) took
a pioneering approach and proposed to approximate these strategies by creating a human annotated politeness corpora, and training a classifier to
capture general linguistic patterns of both negative
and positive politeness. Recent works leverage on
such classifier to develop either generative (Niu
and Bansal, 2018; Firdaus et al., 2020) or rewritingbased (Madaan et al., 2020; Fu et al., 2020) approaches. Figure 1 contrasts these approaches, with
respect to politeness strategies. While these have
been applied to generic and domain-agnostic scenarios, it remains unclear how well such principles
transfer to task-specific domains.
In this work, we assess under a transfer-learning
scenario, the applicability of both generative and
rewriting politeness approaches to a novel domain.
Specifically, we use the challenging fashion domain as a use case, given its vocabulary complexity
and highly specific-nature 1
. Namely, we propose
to overcome the lack of labeled data by extending
state-of-the-art generative (Niu and Bansal, 2018)
and rewriting (Madaan et al., 2020) approaches, respectively, towards allowing each of them to overcome the domain-shift, and transferring linguistic
politeness constructs to a novel (fashion) domain.
This is one of the first works to study politeness
approaches for task-oriented dialog agents, contributing with:
• An adaptation of generative and rewriting politeness approaches (section 3), enabling transfer learning for specific domains.
• Comprehensive experiments (section 5), leading to valuable insights regarding how politeness approaches deal with the contentpreservation vs. politeness improvement
trade-off, in task-oriented dialog agents.
• A user-centered study that supports and confirms the conclusions of the automatic evaluation (section 5).
• Explored politeness on a novel domain, conversational assistants on the fashion domain (Saha et al., 2018), exposing the opportunities for improving politeness.
6 Conclusion
In this work, we address the research gap regarding the development of polite task-oriented dialog
agents. We demonstrate that while politeness language constructs tend not to be domain-specific,
their application is, requiring politeness approaches
to cope with domain-specific vocabulary. Particularly, we show that when improving politeness in
task-specific utterances, rewriting approaches consistently deliver better results, given that generative
alternatives need to attend to two tasks.
In summary, the key takeaways are:
• Politeness through rewriting results in the
most robust approach, providing a good balance between delivering polite utterances and
preserving content.
• Politeness answer generation is less stable. By
definition, generation and politeness improvement need to be addressed jointly, which is
too ambitious in a domain-transfer setting.
• Bringing politeness to task-oriented dialog
agents, characterized by operating over highly
specific domains, is achievable with the proposed model domain adaptations.
As future work, we plan to extend our work and
research methods that select the best politeness
strategies while accounting for the specificity of
distinct conversation phases (e.g. greeting vs. product description utterances).