1 Introduction
Contextualized word representations provided by
models such as BERT (Devlin et al., 2019),
RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019), GPT3 (Brown et al.,
2020), T5 (Raffel et al., 2020) and more, were
shown in recent years to be a critical component for
obtaining state-of-the-art performance on a wide
range of Natural Language Processing (NLP) tasks,
from surface syntactic tasks as tagging and parsing,
to downstream semantic tasks as question answering, information extraction and text summarization.
While advances reported for English using such
models are unprecedented, previously reported results using PLMs in Modern Hebrew are far from
satisfactory. Specifically, the BERT-based Hebrew
section of multilingual-BERT (Devlin et al., 2019)
(henceforth, mBERT), did not provide a similar
boost in performance as observed by the English
section of mBERT. In fact, for several reported
tasks, the results of the mBERT model are on a par
with pre-neural models or neural models based on
non-contextual embeddings (Tsarfaty et al., 2020;
Klein and Tsarfaty, 2020). An additional Hebrew
BERT-based model, HeBERT (Chriqui and Yahav,
2021), has been recently released, yet without empirical evidence of performance improvements on
key components of the Hebrew NLP pipeline.
The challenge of developing PLMs for
morphologically-rich and medium-resourced languages such as Modern Hebrew is twofold. First,
contextualized word representations are obtained
by pre-training a large language model on massive
quantities of unlabeled texts. In Hebrew, the size of
published texts available for training is relatively
small. To wit, Hebrew Wikipedia (300K articles)
used for training mBERT is orders of magnitude
smaller compared to English Wikipedia (6M articles). Second, commonly accepted benchmarks for
evaluating Hebrew models, via Morpho-Syntactic
Tagging and Parsing (Sadde et al., 2018), or Named
Entity Recognition (Bareket and Tsarfaty, 2020)
require decomposition of words into morphemes,
1
which are distinct of the sub-words (a.k.a. wordpieces) provided by standard PLMs. Such morphemes are as of yet not readily available in the
PLMs’ output embeddings.
Evaluating BERT-based models on morphemelevel tasks is thus non-trivial due to the mismatch
between the sub-word tokens used as sub-word

input units used by the PLMs and the sub-word
morphological units needed for evaluation. PLMs
employ sub-word tokenization mechanisms such
as WordPiece or Byte-Pair Encoding (BPE) for the
purposes of minimizing Out-Of-Vocabulary words
(Sennrich et al., 2016). These sub-word tokens are
generated in a pre-processing step, without utilization of any linguistic information, and passed as
input to the PLM. Crucially, such word-pieces do
not reflect morphological units. Extracting morphological units from contextualized vectors provided
by PLMs is challenging yet necessary in order to
enable morphological-level evaluation of Hebrew
PLMs on standard benchmarks.
In this paper we introduce AlephBERT, a Hebrew
PLM trained on more data and a larger vocabulary
than any Hebrew PLM before.2 Moreover, we propose a novel architecture that extracts the morphological sub-word units implicitly encoded in the
contextualized vectors outputted by PLMs. Using
AlephBERT and the proposed morphological extraction model we enable evaluation on all existing
Hebrew benchmarks. We thus present a processing and evaluation pipeline tailored to fit Morphologically Rich Languages (MRLs), i.e., covering

sentence-level, word-level and most importantly
sub-word morphological-level tasks (Segmentation,
Part-of-Speech Tagging, full Morphological Tagging, Dependency Parsing, Named Entity Recognition (NER) and Sentiment Analysis), and present
new and improved SOTA for Modern Hebrew on
all of these tasks.

7 Conclusion
Modern Hebrew, a morphologically-rich and
medium-resourced language, has for long suffered
from a gap in the resources available for NLP applications, and lower level of empirical results than
observed in other, resource-rich languages. This
work provides the first step in remedying the situation, by making available a large Hebrew PLM,
named AlephBERT, with larger vocabulary and
larger training set than any Hebrew PLM before,
and with clear evidence as to its empirical advantages. Crucially, we augment the PLM with
a morphological disambiguation component that
matches the input granularity of the downstream
tasks. Our system does not presuppose Hebrewspecific linguistic-rules, and can be transparently
applied to any language for which 2-level segmentation data (i.e., the standard UD benchmarks) exists.
AlephBERTbase obtains state-of-the-art results on
morphological segmentation, POS tagging, morphological feature extraction, dependency parsing,
named-entity recognition, and sentiment analysis,
outperforming all existing Hebrew PLMs. Our proposed morphologically-driven pipeline11 serves as
a solid foundation for future evaluation of Hebrew
PLMs and of MRLs in general.