1 Introduction
Information disseminated in social media such as
Twitter can be useful for addressing several realworld problems like rumour detection, disaster
management, and opinion mining. Most of these
problems involve classifying social media posts
into different categories based on their textual content. For example, classifying the veracity of tweets
as False, True, or unverified allows one to debunk
the rumours evolving in social media (Zubiaga
et al., 2018a). However, social media text is extremely noisy with informal grammar, typographical errors, and irregular vocabulary. In addition,
the character limit (240 characters) imposed by social media such as Twitter make it even harder to
perform text classification.
Social media text classification, such as rumour stance classification1
(Qazvinian et al.,
2011; Zubiaga et al., 2016; Lukasik et al., 2019)
can be addressed effectively using sequence labelling models such as long short term memory
(LSTM) networks (Zubiaga et al., 2016; Augenstein et al., 2016; Kochkina et al., 2017; Zubiaga
et al., 2018b,a; Dey et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2019;
Tian et al., 2020). Though they consider the sequential nature of tweets, they ignore the temporal
aspects associated with the tweets. The time gap
between tweets varies a lot and LSTMs ignore this
irregularity in tweet occurrences. They are discrete
state space models where hidden representation
changes from one tweet to another without considering the time difference between the tweets.
Considering the exact times at which tweets occur
can play an important role in determining the label.
If the time gap between tweets is large, then the
corresponding labels may not influence each other
but can have a very high influence if they are closer.
We propose to use recurrent neural ordinary differential equations (RNODE) (Rubanova
et al., 2019) and developed a novel approach bidirectional RNODE (Bi-RNODE), which can naturally consider the temporal information to perform
time sensitive classification of social media posts.
NODE (Chen et al., 2018) is a continuous depth
deep learning model that performs transformation
of feature vectors in a continuous manner using ordinary differential equation solvers. NODEs bring
parameter efficiency and address model selection
in deep learning to a great extent. RNODE generalizes RNN by extending NODE for time-series
data by considering temporal information associated with the sequential data. Hidden representations are changed continuously by considering the
temporal information.
We propose to use RNODE for the task of sequence labeling of posts, which considers arrival
times of the posts for updating hidden representations and for classifying the post. In addition, we
propose a novel model, Bi-RNODE, which considers not only information from the past but also
from the future in predicting the label of the post.
Here, continuously evolving hidden representations
in the forward and backward directions in time are
combined and used to predict the post label. We
show the effectiveness of the proposed models on
the rumour stance classification problem in Twitter using the RumourEval-2019 (Derczynski et al.,
2019) dataset. We found RNODE and Bi-RNODE
can improve the social media text classification by
effectively making use of the temporal information
and is better than LSTMs and gated recurrent units
(GRU) with temporal features.
5 Conclusion
We proposed RNODE, Bi-RNODE models for sequence classification of social media posts. These
models consider temporal information of the posts
and hidden representation are evolved as solution
to ODE. Through experiments, we show these models perform better than LSTMs on rumour stance
classification problem in Twitter