For many languages, domains and tasks, large
datasets with high-quality labels are not available.
To tackle this issue, cheaper data acquisition methods have been suggested, such as crowdsourcing
or automatic annotation methods like weak and
distant supervision. Unfortunately, compared to
gold-standard data, these approaches come with
more labeling mistakes, which are known as noisy
labels. Noise-handling has become an established
approach to mitigate the negative impact of learning with noisy labels. A variety of methods have
been proposed that model the noise, or clean and
filter the noisy instances (Hedderich et al., 2021;
Algan and Ulusoy, 2021). Jindal et al. (2019) show
e.g. a 30% boost in performance after applying
noise-handling techniques on a CNN-based text
classifier.
In a recent work, Tänzer et al. (2021) showed
that BERT (Devlin et al., 2019) has an inherent
robustness against noisy labels. The generalization
performance on the clean distribution drops only
slowly with the increase of the mislabeled samples.
Also, they show that early-stopping is crucial for
learning with noisy labels as BERT will eventually memorize all wrong labels when trained long
enough. However, their experiments only focus on
a single type of noise and a limited range of noise
levels. It remains unclear if BERT still performs robustly under a wider range of noise types and with
higher fractions of mislabeled samples. Moreover,
they perform early-stopping on a clean validation
set, which may not be available under low resource
settings. Last but not least, they do not compare to
any noise-handling methods.
In this work, we investigate the behaviors of
BERT on tasks with different noise types and noise
levels. We also study the effect of noise-handling
methods under these settings. Our main results
include (1) BERT is robust against injected noise,
but could be vulnerable to noise from weak supervision. In fact, the latter, even at a low level, can
be more challenging than high injected noise. (2)
Existing noise-handling methods do not improve
the peak performance of BERT under any noise
settings we investigated; as is shown with further
analysis, noise-handling methods rarely render the
correct labels more distinguishable from the incorrect ones.
On several text classification datasets and for different noise types, we showed that BERT is noise
resistant under injected noise, but not necessarily
under weak supervision noise. In both cases, the
improvement obtained by applying noise-handling
methods are limited. Our analysis on the separability of losses corresponding to correct and incorrect
labeled samples provides evidence to this argument.
Our analysis offers both motivation and insights to
further improve label noise-handling methods and
make them useful on more realistic types of noise.