1 Introduction
Multilingual text representations are becoming increasingly important in science as well as the business community. However how universal and versatile they truly are? Can we use them to train
one, multilingual, production-ready sentiment classifier? To verify this research question, we gathered
a massive collection of sentiment analysis datasets
and evaluated 11 different models on them. We
want to assess the performance of fine-tuning languages models as well as language models as feature extractors for simpler, even linear models.
Sentiment analysis is subjective and both domain and language-dependent, hence there is an
even greater need to understand the behaviour and
performance of the multilingual setup. We focused
on multilingual sentiment classification because
our business use cases involve the analysis of texts
in multiple languages across the world. Moreover,
one universal model in a production environment is
much easier to deploy, maintain, monitor, remove
biases or improve the model’s fairness - especially
in cases when the load differs between languages
and could change over time. We want to compare state-of-the-art multilingual embedding methods and select the ones with the best performance
across languages.
The main objective of this article is to answer
the following Research Questions: (RQ1) Are we
able to create a single multilingual sentiment classifier, that performs equally well for each language?
(RQ2) Does fine-tuning of transformer-based models significantly improve sentiment classification
results? (RQ3) What is the relationship between
model size and performance? Is bigger always
better?
Our main contribution includes 3 main points.
Firstly, we perform a large scoping review of published sentiment datasets. Using a set of rigid inclusion and exclusion criteria, we filter the initial pool
of 342 datasets down to 80 high-quality datasets
representing 27 languages. Secondly, we evaluated
how universal and versatile multilingual text representations are for the sentiment classification problem. Finally, we compared many deep learningbased approaches with fine-tuning and without it
for multilingual sentiment classification.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents a literature review on the
topic of multilingual sentiment analysis; Section 3
describes the language models, datasets, and our
evaluation methodology; Section 4 describes the
conducted experiments and summarizes the results;
Section 5 discusses the results in terms of research
questions; Section 6 presents conclusions and describes further works.

6 Conclusions and Further Works
In this work we evaluated multilingual text representations for the task of sentiment classification
by comparing multiple approaches, using different
deep learning methods. In the process, we gathered
the biggest collection of multi-lingual sentiment
datasets - 80 datasets for 27 languages. We evaluated 11 models (language models and text vectorization techniques) in 3 different scenarios. We
found out that it is possible to create one model
which achieves the best or most competitive results
in all languages in our collected dataset, but there
is no statistical difference between top-performing
models. We found out that there is a significant benefit from fine-tuning transformer-based language
models and that a model size is correlated with
performance.
While conducting experiments we identified
further issues which we find worth addressing.
Dataset quality assessment is in our opinion the
most important one and we are planning to address
it in further works. Meanwhile, we used datasets
with a literature background and trust that they
were carefully prepared and have decent quality
annotations. We also found out that it is difficult to
propose a coherent experiments methodology with
such imbalance in languages and datasets sizes.
Moreover, analyzing results is difficult, when one
must address dimensions of datasets, languages,
data sources, models, and experiments scenarios.
Finally, we found out that when sub-sampling
a dataset for experiments, seeds play a significant
role (see results in Figure 4). To analyze this phenomenon, we intend to launch further research and
use noise ratio (Northcutt et al., 2021) and data cartography (Swayamdipta et al., 2020) to understand
how this split differs from the others. This will
be, in our opinion, a good start to a comprehensive
analysis of datasets quality for the multi-lingual
sentiment classification task which we intend to
perform.