A piece of text can contain several events. In order
to truly understand this text, it is vital to understand
the subevent and temporal relationships between
these events.(Mani et al., 2006a; Chambers and Jurafsky, 2008; Yang and Mitchell, 2016; Araki et al.,
2014). Both temporal as well as subevent relationships between events satisfy transitivity constraints.
For instance, in the paragraph, “There was a storm
in Atlanta in the night. All the phone lines were
dead the next morning. I was not able to call for
help.”, the event marked by dead occurs after storm
and the event call occurs after dead. Hence, by transitivity, a sensible model should predict that storm
occurs before call. In general, predicting the relationships between different events in the same
document, such that these predictions are coherent,
is a challenging task (Xiang and Wang, 2019).
While previous works utilizing neural methods
provide competitive performances, these works employ multi-class classification per event-pair independently and are not capable of preserving logical
constraints among relations, such as asymmetry
and transitivity, during training time (Ning et al.,
2019; Han et al., 2019a). To address this problem
Wang et al. (2020) introduced a constrained learning framework, wherein they enforce logical coherence amongst the predicted event types through
extra loss terms. However, since the coherence is
enforced in a soft manner using extra loss terms,
there is still room for incoherent predictions. In
this work, we show that it is possible to induce coherence in a much stronger manner by representing
each event using a box (Dasgupta et al., 2020).
We propose a Box Event Relation Extraction
(BERE) model that represents each event as a probabilistic box. Box embeddings (Vilnis et al., 2018)
were first introduced to embed nodes of hierarchical graphs into Euclidean space using hyperrectangles, which were later extended to jointly
embed multi-relational graphs and perform logical
queries (Patel et al., 2020; Abboud et al., 2020). In
this paper, we represent an event complex using
boxes–one box for each event. Such a model enforces logical constraints by design (see Section
3.2). Consider the example in Figure 1. Event dead
(e2) follows event storm (e1), indicating e2 is child
of e1. Boxes can represent these two events as separate representations and by making e1 to contain
the box e2, which not only preserve their semantics, but also can infer its antisymmetric relation
that event e1 is a parent of event e2. However, the
previous models based on pairwise-event vector
representations have no real relation between representations (e1, e2) and (e2, e1) that can guarantee
the logical coherence.
Experimental results over three datasets, HiEve,
MATRES, and Event StoryLine (ESL), show that
our method improves the baseline (Wang et al.,2020) by 6.8 and 4.2 F1 points on single task and
by 0.95 and 3.29 F1 points on joint task over symmetrical dataset. Furthermore, our BERE model
decreases conjunctive constraint violation rate by
85∼88% on a single-task models compared to plain
vector model, and by 38% on joint-task model compared to constraint-injected vector model. We show
that handling antisymmetric constraints, that exist among different relations, can satisfy the interwined conjunctive constraints and encourage the
model towards a coherent output across temporal
and subevent tasks.
We propose a novel event relation extraction
method that utilizes box representation. The proposed method projects each event to a box representation which can model asymmetric relationships
between entities. Utilizing this box representation,
we design our relation extraction model to handle antisymmetry between events of (ei
, ej ) and
(ej , ei) which previous vector models were not capable of. Through experiments on three datasets,
we show that the proposed method not only free of
antisymmetric constraint violations but also have
drastically lower conjunctive constraint violations
while maintaining similar or better performance
in F1. Our model shows that box representation
can provide coherent classification across multiple event relations and opens up future research
for box representations in event-to-event relation
classification.