In the current paper we aim to shed some light
on the way concreteness and abstractness are represented in word embeddings. This might help
to better understand the concept of concreteness
that seems to be an important semantic property
used to explain various phenomena in language
and language understanding. Ultimately, it might
also contribute a little bit to the understanding of
the semantic spaces in which we embed words for
many tasks.

The first question we want to address is to what degree concreteness can be represented as a vector in
the embedding space. Such a vector vconcr should
have the property that either the cosine between a
vector vw for a word w and vconcr or the length of
the projection of vw on vconcr corresponds to the
concreteness value w.
The second question concerns the relation between concreteness and abstractness. Is abstractness characterized by a direction in the embeddings
space in a similar way as concreteness is, or is abstractness just the absence of concreteness? The studies of Hill and Korhonen (2014) and Naumann
et al. (2018) suggest that abstractness could go into
many different directions and is quite different from
concreteness since abstract words occur in more
diverse contexts. On the other hand side, in all psycholinguistic studies concreteness and abstractness
are treated as the two extremes on one scale.
Finally, we want to know, whether concreteness
is a property that can be added to or removed from
words, like e.g. gender can be separated and used
to explicitly relate words like king to queen. There
seem to be many cases of regular polysemy in
which one reading of the word is more concrete
than the other one. Examples are the polysemy
between buildings and institutions for words like
school, church, parliament, theater, etc. or between
process and the result of the process (like e.g. creation, that can either denote the process of creating
something or the thing that is created) or between
a function and the person holding that function. In
all cases it is clear that one reading is more concrete than the other one. What we want to know
is to which extend the difference between the two
meanings is determined by concreteness.

Concreteness is a core semantic property of words
that has received a lot of attention in psycholinguistic research. Friendly et al. (1982) define concrete
words as words that “refer to tangible objects, materials or persons which can be easily perceived
with the senses”. Brysbaert et al. (2014) define
concreteness as the degree to which the concept
denoted by a word refers to a perceptible entity.
Theijssen et al. (2011) point out that in general
two concepts of concreteness are used that do not
completely overlap, namely sensory perceivability
and specificity. However, they also note that most
subjects in tests interpret concreteness as sensory
perceivability. Also in a corpus study they could
show that in cases where concreteness plays a role

in the choice of a syntactic construction, sensory
perceivability is the best predictor.
Various studies suggest that concrete and abstract words are represented and processed differently by the human brain (see a.o. Binder et al.
(2005); Kousta et al. (2011); Borghi et al. (2017)).
E.g. it is assumed that concreteness influences
learning, recognition memory and the speed of
visual recognition, reading and spelling (Spreen
and Schulz, 1966; Hargis and Gickling, 1978; Sadoski et al., 2004; Palmer et al., 2013; Neath and
Surprenant, 2020). Moreover, studies conducted
on abstract and concrete words also found that
the participants remembered concrete words better
than the abstract words (for an overview of various
studies see e.g. Yui et al., 2017). This difference
is explained by the Dual Coding Theory (Paivio,
1970) according to which concrete concepts are
stored verbally and visually in mind while abstract
concepts are only stored verbally. A difference in
recognition ease and speed is explained by the Context Availability Hypothesis (Schwanenflugel and
Shoben, 1983; Schwanenflugel, 2013). This hypothesis states that it is crucial to evoke the context
of a word to access its meaning and that it is easier
to construct the appropriate context for concrete
than for abstract words.
Among others Hill et al. (2014) and Naumann
et al. (2018) have shown that abstract words occur
in more broad and diverse contexts than concrete
words. Furthermore, it was noted in several studies
(see e.g. (Tanaka et al., 2013)) and investigated in
detail by Frassinelli et al. (2017) and Naumann
et al. (2018) that concrete words tend to occur in
the context of other concrete words and abstract
words in the context of other abstract words.
Most studies that collected or predicted concreteness values for words either ignored the fact that
many words have several senses or excluded ambiguous words. The statement of Gilhooly and
Logie (1980) still seems to be valid: “The problem
of word ambiguity has generally been overlooked
in compiling lists of words measured on various
attributes.” Only a few mostly smaller studies collected concreteness judgments for different word
senses. These are, as far as we know, (Gilhooly
and Logie, 1980) for English, (Hager, 1994) for
German, and more recently (Ðurdevi ¯ c et al. ´ , 2017)
for Serbian and both (Reijnierse et al., 2019) and
(Scott et al., 2019) for English words.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.
In section 2 start with an overview of the few studies that try to identify concreteness in embedding
spaces. In section 3 we describe the data we have
used. In the following sections we present a series of experiments to get a better understanding
of the representation of concreteness in embedding
spaces: in section 4 we compare several possibilities to determine the direction of concreteness and
abstractness in an embedding space, in section 5
we compare the mutual similarity between concrete
and abstract words and finally in section 6 we have
a short look at the possibilities to represent the
meaning of ambiguous words with a concrete and
an abstract sense.

We have seen that concreteness can be identified as
a direction in the word embedding space. Various
methods, based on many words with concreteness
values or just on a view highly concrete words give
almost the same vector for concreteness. Moreover,
the cosine of these vectors with the embeddings
of words correlates strongly with the concreteness
judgments of human subjects of these words. Thus
our first research question can be answered positively.
Furthermore, we see that concreteness and abstractness are quite symmetric properties. We can compute vectors for concreteness and abstractness
independently and found both for English and German that the angle between these vectors is almost
180 degrees. Moreover, we do not see any indication that all concrete form one cluster while abstract
words are distributed more uniformly through the
embedding space or the other way around. Thus,
we also can give a positive answer to the second
research question.
Finally, we hoped that we would find pairs of
words that just differ w.r.t. the concreteness dimension, like the words king and queen only differ w.r.t.
the gender dimension. At least we would like to
find words with different senses, where the degree
of concreteness is the main difference between the
senses. Though there are many polysemous words,
that seem to be good candidates and though we can
make suggestive visualizations for selected examples, our last experiment is not very encouraging in
this respect. In the first place it has to be noted that
the evaluation is quite problematic since we do not
know what the embedding of the specific senses of
a word should be. Nevertheless, at least in the case
of the building/institution ambiguity the senses the
senses are clearly distinguished by concreteness,
but there are many more differences between the
senses than just this aspect. The last result does not
mean that it is not possible to learn the relation between vectors for different senses of a word in the
case of regular polysemy, but the relation is more
complex than just linearly adding concreteness to
the embedding.