Neural data-driven models have managed to perform comparably well in various tasks related to
natural language processing (Eberts and Ulges,
2020; Adoma et al., 2020). Nevertheless, the definition and the training processes of such models
have made their decision non-natively interpretable.
Several studies and experiments have been conducted to address this issue and explain the decision outputs of such models in various tasks such
as emotion prediction (Yang et al., 2019), question
answering (Ramnath et al., 2020), the classification of linguistic styles (Hayati et al., 2021), and
lexicon-based sentiment prediction (Hwang and
Lee, 2021).
Sentiment analysis is a well-established field
of research that aims to extract sentiment and its
aspects in a written text. Its performances have
reached acceptable levels in different domains such
as product reviews (Xie et al., 2020), movie reviews
(Thongtan and Phienthrakul, 2019), social media
(Tam et al., 2021), financial news (Takala et al.,
2014), and Personal Narratives (PN) which are recollections of real-life events that are experienced
by the narrator (Tammewar et al., 2019).
Recently, a deeper understanding of the expressed sentiment and emotion has gained growing
research interest (Tammewar et al., 2020, 2021;
Bayerl et al., 2021; Ding et al., 2020). These works
focus on a more fine-grained analysis on the expressed sentiment/emotion by identifying the Emotion Carriers (entities or actions that explain, cause
or carry the emotion). The concept of Emotion Carriers (EC) was first introduced by Tammewar et al.
(2020) for German PNs. In this genre of text, the
identification of ECs may help in better understanding the emotional state of the narrator and what
has caused distress (Tammewar et al., 2021; Bayerl
et al., 2021).
In this work, we address the problem of analyzing and comparing the text chunks used by machines and humans when predicting the sentiment
polarity of text documents. For this study we have
selected the Personal Narrative genre since it is
rich with entities and relations which are sparsely
distributed. We identify the tokens that contribute
to the model’s prediction according to their attributions given by Integrated Gradients (Sundarara jan et al., 2017), an Explainable-AI technique, and
compare them with the tokens tagged as ECs by the
human annotator. Our comparative analysis shows
the human annotator identifies the tokens that explain an event or its participants as the carrier of
emotions and sentiments, which clearly convey the
activation of the emotional state in the narrator,
even though they are not explicitly manifesting a
sentiment. Meanwhile, the DNN model bases its
decision mostly on a limited set of tokens which
belong to the category of emotion-laden words (see
Figure 1 for an example).
We summarize our contribution as follows:
• The annotation of a dataset of Personal Narratives to obtain the sentiment polarity, and the
Emotion Carriers at the Functional Unit (Bunt
et al., 2010) level to take into account the communicative functions. This is in contrast with
traditional annotation at the document or sentence level.
• The evaluation of the annotation results and
training a sentiment prediction model based
on the AlBERTo architecture (Polignano et al.,
2019) using the annotated data, as well as a
baseline architecture for the task of Emotion
Carrier Detection.
• The study of the tokens contributing to the
model’s prediction of sentiment and comparing them with the Emotion Carriers identified
by the human annotator, and the contribution
of the Emotion Carriers in the prediction of
the model by their  influence on the output
confidence score.

In this work we studied whether the sentiment prediction decision of DNN models can be explained
by Emotion Carriers, spans of text that convey and
carry emotions. We have focused our study on Personal Narratives which encompass real-life events
and experiences that activate the emotional state
of the narrator. We have collected a dataset of Personal Narratives and conducted an annotation task
for sentiment polarity and Emotion Carrier selection at the Functional Unit for each narrative. We
have then developed a sentiment prediction model
based on AlBERTo architecture (Polignano et al.,
2019). We have investigated whether the decision
of the model is based on the Emotion Carriers that
the human annotator selected to explain the sentiment of the text. Furthermore, we have studied the
impact of the Emotion Carriers on the confidence
score of the polarity prediction model. Our analysis has shown that the human annotators tend to
focus on manifestation of emotions through words
describing actions and events that have activated
the emotional state of the narrator. However, the
model bases its decision on explicit representations
of sentiment such as emotion-laden words.