In recent years, morphological (re)inflection tasks
have gained a lot of attention in NLP.1 Subsequently, several multi-lingual morphological
datasets have emerged to allow for the supervised
training of morphological models, most notably
UniMorph (McCarthy et al., 2020), that organizes
words into inflectional tables, annotating each inflected word-form with its respective feature-set.
While western languages are widely represented
in UniMorph, many morphologically rich languages (Tsarfaty et al., 2010, 2020) exhibit rich
and diverse inflection patterns that make them less
compatible with the flat feature-sets in the UniMorph schema. Concretely, in some cases it is
completely impossible to annotate parts of the inflectional paradigm with a flat bundle, as is the
case with case stacking, and in other cases, such as
polypersonal agreement, the annotation solutions
provided are unnatural, non-transparent, and are
barely used in practice. As a result, languages exhibiting such phenomena are under-represented in
UniMorph, and when they are, the inflection tables
for these languages are often incomplete.
In this paper we propose a general solution
for annotating such structures, thus extending the
UniMorph annotation schema to fully cover a
wider range of morphologically-complex argumentmarking phenomena. Following Anderson (1992),
we propose a so-called layered annotation of features, where the inflectional features take the form
of a hierarchical structure, in the spirit of formal
linguistic frameworks as that of Johnson (1988);
Pollard and Sag (1994); Shieber (2003); Bresnan
et al. (2015). We organize the features of multiple
arguments in a hierarchical structure, rather than
the current flat structure that accommodates only
subject concords. This schema shift allows for an
adequate annotation of polypersonal agreement and
of possessed nominals, where a word has multiple
number and gender features, as well as forms with
case stacking, where a word has multiple cases.
We apply the suggested solution to Georgian,
an agglutinative language with a convoluted verbal system, that indicates both subjects and objects
with true affixes (rather than clitics that are omittable from the inflection tables). We create a new
human-verified dataset for Georgian, that covers
most of the grammatical phenomena in Georgian
verbs, and includes 118 lemmas, adding up to about
21k verb forms, compared with the 47 lemmas and
3.3k verb forms, some of which are erroneous, currently available in the Georgian UniMorph.
We use the new dataset to train a standard
morphological reinflection model (Silfverberg and
Hulden, 2018) and show that training on the Georgian inflections currently available in UniMorph
is not sufficient for generalizing to the more inclusive set of inflections that are allowed by the
new scheme. We conclude that our annotation approach provides a more complete representation of
linguistic behaviors, and that our proposed Georgian dataset provides a much better depiction of
the morphological phenomena that exist in the data
and the computational challenge reflected therein.
We therefore call to apply layered annotation to
all currently existing morphological data in UniMorph, to more consistently and transparently capture the linguistic reality and morphological complexity reflected in the worlds languages.
This paper proposes a transition of the UniMorph
annotation standard to a layered hierarchical annotation of features. This revised schema caters for
complex marking phenomena including multiple
pronominal agreement. We apply it to Georgian,
and construct a corresponding new dataset that is
large, balanced, complete with respect to grammatical phenomena in the Georgian verb system and
verified by native-speakers. Our experiments with
a standard reinflection model on the old and new
Georgian datasets shows that the old UniMorph
dataset does not generalize well to the new testset, due to its partial coverage. This work is intended to encourage the community to extend the
annotation of different languages to include phenomena such as polypersonal agreement and others
that can be dealt with using a hierarchical annotation, ultimately leading to more complete and
consistent benchmarks for studying non-trivial and
less-explored areas of computational morphology.
