1 Introduction
South Asia1
is home to one-quarter of the world’s
population and boasts immense linguistic diversity (Saxena and Borin, 2008; Bashir, 2016). With
members of at least four top-level major linguistic
families2
and several putative linguistic isolates,
this region is a fascinating arena for linguistic research. The languages of South Asia, moreover,
have a long recorded history, and have undergone
complex change through genetic descent, sociolinguistic interactions, and contact influence.
Nevertheless, South Asian languages for the
most part remain severely underdocumented (van
Driem, 2008), and several languages with even
official administrative status (e.g. Sindhi) are lowresource (if not data-scarce) for the purposes of
all natural language processing tasks (Joshi et al.,
2020). This data scatteredness persists despite long
native traditions of linguistic description, continued language vitality with active use on the internet, and vast numbers of speakers (Rahman, 2008;
Groff, 2017).
We argue that the most basic problem in NLP/CL
work on South Asian languages is not data scarcity,
but data scatteredness. There is much data to be
extracted for even the most endangered languages
(e.g., Burushaski, a language isolate of the northwest), from annotated corpora and grammatical
descriptions compiled by linguists, if only one is
willing to wrangle idiosyncratic data formats and
digitise existing texts. Thus far, commercial interests and scientific agencies have only intermittently
supported the development of language technology
for the region—taking a new approach, we propose a research programme from the perspective
of computational historical linguistics, outlining
current data gathering initiatives in this discipline
and potential benefits to other work across NLP.
5 Conclusion
In this paper, we gave an overview of the state
of NLP in South Asia with a special focus on
historical–comparative linguistics, a research programme of which we believe will help address the
issue of data scatteredness. South Asian languages
are not obliged to remain low-resource (in the NLP
sense), and have plenty of speakers who would like
access to and would benefit from language technologies, along with a multitude of raw linguistic
resources that can be used to cultivate them. Incentives have not been in place to support those
demands, however, so we suggest an alternative
route founded in linguistic research to gather data.
Collective efforts have had great success recently
in NLP—besides institutional efforts like the Stanford Center for Research on Foundation Models
(Bommasani et al., 2021) and HuggingFace’s BigScience Workshop,12 there are grassroots organisations like MaskhaneNLP for African languages
(Nekoto et al., 2020) and AI4Bharat (Kakwani
et al., 2020) that are working towards improving
resource availability. Our proposals in this paper
are the first seeds of a programme similar in spirit,
motivated by a dual interest in understanding South
Asian language history and remedying inequalities
in technological availability.