Human experience is mediated through the senses,
which we use to interact with the world. Since
the perceptual world is so important to us, all languages have resources to describe the sensory perception. Nevertheless, previous research showed
that, at least in Western European languages, the
visual dimension is prevalent in language, with a
richer terminology used to describe it, while the
olfactory dimension is less represented (Winter,
2019). For example, in English, there are less
unique words for the smell domain than for the
other senses. They are also used less frequently
and olfactory descriptions are often a target of
cross-modal expressions.
Sensory terminology has been researched previously, with the goal to build resources and to analyse how the different senses are described in language (Tekiroglu et al. ˘ , 2014b,a). Some research
is specifically devoted to smell (Lefever et al.,
2018), but they all focus on contemporary language. One notable exception is the collection of
essays published in J˛edrzejowski and Staniewski
(2021), where olfaction in different languages is analysed in a diachronic perspective. For example, Strik Lievers (2021) describes how the olfactory lexicon has changed from Latin to Italian.
In this work, we contribute to the diachronic
analysis of olfactory language by annotating
a multilingual benchmark with smell situations
spanning three centuries. Compared to existing
studies, our focus is not on the occurrences of single terms, but we rather capture smell events in
texts, i.e. more complex structures involving different participants. The benchmark currently covers six languages (Dutch, English, French, German, Italian and Slovene). Annotation of Latin
data is ongoing, but we do not include here the
results for this language because they are still preliminary.
We describe the annotation guidelines and
the document selection process. Our benchmark includes texts issued between 1620 and
1920 covering ten domains of olfactory interest to cultural history. We release the benchmark at https://github.com/Odeuropa/
benchmarks_and_corpora and we present a
first analysis of its content.
In this paper, we presented a multilingual benchmark annotated with smell-related information
and covering six languages, which we make available to the research community. We have described the document selection rationale, the annotation process and the main challenges related
to the creation of a multilingual benchmark containing historical documents. Annotation of Latin
is in progress, and it will be added to the benchmark as soon as it is complete.
The benchmark is only a first step towards the
analysis and extraction of olfactory information
from historical documents. The work introduced
in Section 7 will be extended to all six languages,
using historical BERTs when available. Furthermore, we will go beyond simple sentence classification, training multilingual classifiers to identify lexical units and frame elements. Since the
size of the benchmark is rather limited, we will try
to expand it in the future but also explore semisupervised, few-shot and cross-lingual approaches
to olfactory information extraction.
