Text simplification aims to rewrite complex texts in
order to make them easier to read and understand.
This task can benefit vast low literacy readers, including children, language learners and people with
aphasia, and has recently attracted increasing attention from the research community (Xu et al.,
2016; Zhao et al., 2018; Martin et al., 2019; Dong
et al., 2019). However, most previous research has
focused on sentence-level text simplification and
aim to simplify one sentence at a time. As a result,
few discourse-level phenomena have been examined or understood for achieving document-level
text simplification.
Sentence deletion is a commonly used strategy
to achieve intense simplification (Drndarevic and
Saggion, 2012; Woodsend and Lapata, 2011), i.e.,
some less important sentences from an original
article are simply deleted and ignored for simplification. While professional re-writers may consider
many factors and use several measures of importance to decide if a sentence should be deleted,
some discourse structures provide automated measures to derive importance for sentences in a document. In particular, functional discourse structures categorize text units (sentences or paragraphs)
based on their contents and their function roles in
serving the purpose of a specific text-genre, such
as scientific papers (Teufel et al., 1999; Liakata
et al., 2012) and news articles (Yarlott et al., 2018;
Choubey et al., 2020), and are therefore, expected
to directly reveal the importance of a sentence
within a document.
In this work, we explore the use of news genrespecific functional structures for predicting sentence deletions in news documents. Specifically,
we use news discourse profiling structure, which
categorizes contents of news articles around the
main news event, constructed through a publicly
available system (Choubey et al., 2020)
1
. This system labels each sentence with one of eight content
types reflecting common discourse roles of a sentence in telling a news story, including two content
types for sentences describing the main news event
and its immediate consequences (main content),
two content types for sentences providing contextinforming contents and four content types for sentences providing further supportive information in
a news article.
We perform experiments using the Newsela corpus (Xu et al., 2015), a widely used dataset for
text simplification research that contains 1492 English news articles and four simplified versions
for each news article targeting audience of different reading levels (from elementary to high school
students). Since we aim to achieve maximal simplification, we predict sentence deletions for target reading level corresponding to the elementary
school students. We first build a document-level
neural network as the basic model for predicting
sentence deletions. We then incorporate content
types of sentences into the prediction system using
two methods, 1) by using content type labels as additional features to enrich sentence representations,
and 2) by jointly predicting both sentence deletion
labels and discourse content type labels. Experimental results show that, with little to no drop on
precision, both methods for incorporating sentence
content type information improve the recall (F1
score) on the sentence deletion prediction task by
6.5% (3.6%) and 10.7% (4.3%) respectively. Analysis on the development set shows that the additional deletions correctly recognized by our system
are all sentences providing context-informing or
supportive contents.
We study sentence deletion prediction to achieve
document-level text simplification. We have
showed that a genre-specific functional discourse
structure improves the prediction performance by
large margins, when incorporated into a neural net
model either as new features or for joint learning. For future work, we will study other useful
discourse-level factors for sentence deletion prediction, we will also investigate multi-task learning
to benefit both sentence deletion prediction and
discourse parsing tasks.