This paper aims to stimulate further convergence
between Cognitive Linguistics approaches to language change and computational methods for semantic change. Cognitive Linguistics is a contemporary linguistic paradigm that assumes that linguistic knowledge is rooted in general cognitive capabilities, that language is shaped by usage and that
meaning entails conceptualization (Dabrowska and
Divjak, 2015). It pays particular attention to the interaction between semasiological change, whereby
a word’s meaning changes over time, and onomasiological change, whereby the semantic configuration of a set of (near-)synonyms is reorganized
over time. In this paper we focus on a single set of
Dutch near-synonyms, vernielen and vernietigen,
roughly translated as ‘to destroy’. We replicate the
analysis of these verbs from Geeraerts (1997) with
distributional models. The analysis, which tracks
the meaning of both words in a corpus of 16th-20th
century prose data, shows that both lexical items
have undergone semantic change led by differences
in their prototypical semantic core, as predicted by
Geeraerts’ work.
The models for the four subcorpora show how the
relationship between the near-synonyms vernielen
and vernietigen has changed over time. Semasiologically, vernielen was the major variant in the
16th and 17th century, occurring in tokens related
to the death of persons and concrete, natural objects.
Over the course of the 18th century, it developed its
prototypical meaning related to the destruction of
(parts of) buildings, often by fire, and this meaning
remained its core usage in the 19th century. By the
20th century, the verb had decreased in frequency
and its prototypical core was no longer distinguishable from the data. Vernietigen, in contrast, was
the less frequent variant in the 16th and 17th century and at that time, there were no clear contexts
yet where the verb occurred. It was mostly found
in a semantically diverse cluster where its nearsynonym vernielen was possible as well. From the
18th century onwards, the verb started to increase
in frequency and it developed its prototypical sense
of being used with abstract objects. In the 19th
century, it also started to invade contexts where
vernielen was preferred before (specifically related
to the death of persons and to war). In the 20th
century data, we also found a syntactic cluster, consisting of function words that often occur in the
context of vernietigen.
Onomasiologically, the analysis showcased how
the nuances in the concept ‘to destroy’ evolve over
time and have become more outspoken. For instance, the clusters related to the destruction of
parts of buildings are not yet visible in the oldest
data but they are important clusters in the more
recent datasets. Similarly, the cluster with abstract
objects is not yet distinguished by the analysis for
the 16th and 17th century, but these objects form
a cluster on their own in the 18th and 19th century data. Moreover, the analysis also showed how
these particular nuances of meaning are typically
expressed by a particular verb. In the visualization, for instance, there is clearly less overlap (or
interchangeability) between the verbs in the later
periods (except in the 20th century data, where
vernielen is infrequent).
Thus, this case-study showcases an example of
how formal onomasiological variation and conceptual onomasiological variation can interact. On the
one hand, vernielen and vernietigen serve as formal
alternatives in the largest cluster from the 16th and
17th century data. However, from the 18th century onwards, each verb increasingly retreats to its
prototypical core. Arguably, they should therefore
be considered conceptually distinct, prototypically
referring to different nuances of meaning, even
though they remain nearly synonymous.
Methodologically, our usage of distributional
models combined with a cluster analysis and the
method, developed in Montes (2021), to analyze
the context words that are good representatives for
the clusters, allowed us to show how both verbs
changed semantically over time. The procedure
employed was quite straightforward, using a single set of parameter settings to model tokens from
four diachronic subcorpora. With this procedure,
we extended the analyses in Montes et al. (2021)
and Geeraerts (1997) to a much longer time span.
Despite the fact that we used a completely different
dataset (a continuous diachronic corpus rather than
dictionary citations from the 19th century only) and
analysis method (an automatic procedure rather
than a manual linguistic analysis), the hypotheses outlined in Geeraerts (1997) were mostly confirmed. Further, this method allowed us to track
semasiological change and to investigate how this
interacts with onomasiological variation over time.
One shortcoming of the approach is that the ideal
settings for the parameters need not be the same
for other near-synonyms or for a comparable linguistic alternation in other languages. In fact, this
is one of the major findings of Montes (2021), who
showed that there is no direct link between a choice
of parameters and the linguistic phenomena that are
revealed by a model constructed with the method
proposed by Schütze (1998). Therefore, while in
this contribution we focus on a single set of parameters settings that were shown to be useful in
analyses of the same linguistic example in another
century, an alternative approach, that has been successfully employed in Montes (2021), is to consider
a broader number of parameter settings to analyze
linguistic phenomena.