1 Introduction
The importance of language modeling in recent
years has grown considerably, as methods based
on large pre-trained neural language models (LMs)
have become the state-of-the-art for many problems
(Devlin et al., 2019; Radford et al., 2019). However,
these neural LMs are based on general architectures
and therefore do not explicitly model linguistic
constraints, and have been shown to capture only
a subset of the syntactic representations typically
found in constituency treebanks (Warstadt et al.,
2020). An alternative line of LM research aims
to explicitly model the parse tree in order to make
the LM syntax-aware. A representative example of
this paradigm, reccurent neural network grammar
(RNNG, Dyer et al., 2016), is reported to perform
better than sequential LMs on tasks that require
complex syntactic analysis (Kuncoro et al., 2019;
Hu et al., 2020; Noji and Oseki, 2021).
The aim of this paper is to extend LMs that inject
syntax to the multilingual setting. This attempt is
important mainly in two ways. Firstly, English has
been dominant in researches on syntax-aware LM.
While multilingual LMs have received increasing
attention in recent years, most of their approaches
do not explicitly model syntax, such as multilingual
BERT (mBERT, Devlin et al., 2019) or XLM-R
(Conneau et al., 2020). Although these models have
shown high performance on some cross-lingual
tasks (Conneau et al., 2018), they perform poorly
on a syntactic task (Mueller et al., 2020). Secondly,
syntax-aware LMs have interesting features other
than their high syntactic ability. One example is
the validity of RNNG as a cognitive model under
an English-based setting, as demonstrated in Hale
et al. (2018). Since human cognitive functions are
universal, while natural languages are diverse, it
would be ideal to conduct this experiment based on
multiple languages.
The main obstacle for multilingual syntax-aware
modeling is that it is unclear how to inject syntactic information while training. A straightforward approach is to make use of a multilingual
treebank, such as Universal Dependencies (UD,
Nivre et al., 2016; Nivre et al., 2020), where trees
are represented in a dependency tree (DTree) formalism. Matthews et al. (2019) evaluated parsing
and language modeling performance on three typologically different languages, using a generative
dependency model. Unfortunately, they revealed
that dependency-based models are less suited to
language modeling than comparable constituencybased models, highlighting the apparent difficulty
of extending syntax-aware LMs to other languages
using existing resources.
This paper revisits the issue of the difficulty of
constructing multilingual syntax-aware LMs, by exploring the performance of multilingual language
modeling using constituency-based models. Since
our domain is a multilingual setting, our focus
turns to how dependency-to-constituency conversion techniques result in different trees, and how
these trees affect the model’s performance. We
obtain constituency treebanks from UD-formatted
dependency treebanks of five languages using nine
tree conversion methods. These treebanks are in
turn used to train an RNNG, which we evaluate on
perplexity and CLAMS (Mueller et al., 2020).
Our contributions are: (1) We propose a methodology for training multilingual syntax-aware LMs
through the dependency tree conversion. (2) We
found an optimal structure that brings out the potential of RNNG across five languages. (3) We
demonstrated the advantage of our multilingual
RNNG over sequential/overparameterized LMs.
7 Conclusion
In this paper, we propose a methodology to learn
multilingual RNNG through dependency tree conversion. We performed multiple conversions to
seek the robust structure which works well multilingually, discussing the effect of multiple structures.
We demonstrated the superiority of our model over
baselines in capturing syntax in a multilingual setting. Since our research is the first step for multilingual syntax-aware LMs, it is necessary to conduct
experiments on more diverse languages to seek a
better structure. We believe that this research would
contribute to the field of theoretical/cognitive linguistics as well because an ultimate goal of linguistics is finding the universal rule of natural language. Finding a reasonable structure in engineering would yield useful knowledge for that purpose.