1 Introduction
Compared to traditional text summarization, dialogue summarization introduces a unique challenge: conversion of first- and second-person
speech into third-person reported speech. Such discrepancy between the observed text and expected
model output puts greater emphasis on abstractive transduction than in traditional summarization
tasks. The disorientation is further exacerbated by
each of many diverse dialogue types calling for a
differing form of transduction – short dialogues require terse abstractions, while meeting transcripts
require summaries by agenda.
Thus, despite the steady emergence of dialogue
summarization datasets, the field of dialogue summarization is still bottlenecked by a scarcity of
training data. To train a truly robust dialogue summarization model, one requires transcript-summary
pairs not only across diverse dialogue domains, but
also across multiple dialogue types as well. The
lack of diverse annotated summarization data is
especially pronounced in low-resourced languages.
From such state of the literature, we identify a need
for unsupervised dialogue summarization.
Our method builds upon previous research on
unsupervised summarization using word graphs.
Starting from the simple assumption that a good
summary sentence is at least as informative as any
single input sentence, we develop novel schemes
for path extraction from word graphs. Our contributions are as follows:
1. We present a novel scheme for path reranking in graph-based summarization. We show
that, in practice, simple keyword counting
performs better than complex baselines. For
longer texts, we present an optional topic segmentation scheme.
2. We introduce a point-of-view (POV) conversion module to convert semi-extractive summaries into fully abstractive summaries. The
new module by itself improves all scores on
baseline methods, as well as our own.
3. Finally, We verify our model on datasets beyond those traditionally used in literature to
provide a strong baseline for future research.
With just an off-the-shelf part-of-speech (POS)
tagger and a list of stopwords, our model can be
applied across different types of dialogue summarization.
6 Conclusion
6.1 Improving MSCG summarization
This paper improves upon previous work on multisentence compression graphs for summarization.
We find that simpler and more adaptive path reranking schemes can boost summarization quality. We
also demonstrate a promising possibility for integrating point-of-view conversion into summarization pipelines.
Compared to previous research, our model is
still insufficient in keyphrase or bigram preservation. This phenomenon is captured by inconsistent
R2 scores across benchmarks. We believe incorporating findings from keyphrase-based summarizers (Riedhammer et al., 2010; Boudin and Morin,
2013) can mitigate such shortcomings.
6.2 Avenues for future research
While our methods demonstrate improved benchmark results, its mostly heuristic nature leaves
much room for enhancement through integration
of statistical models. POV conversion in particular
can benefit from deep learning-based approaches
(Lee et al., 2020). With recent advances in unsupervised sequence to sequence transduction (Li et al.,2020; He et al., 2020), we expect further research
into more advanced POV conversion techniques
will improve unsupervised dialogue summarization.
Another possibility to augment our research with
deep learning is through employing graph networks
(Cui et al., 2020) for representing MSCGs. With
graph networks, each word node and edge can
be represented as a contextualized vector. Such
schemes will enable a more flexible and interpolatable manipulation of syntax captured by traditional
word graphs.
One notable shortcoming of our system is the
generation of summaries that lack grammatical coherence or fluency (Table 4). We intentionally leave
out complex path filters that gauge linguistic validity or factual correctness. We only minimally
inspect our summaries to check for inclusion of
verb nodes, as in Filippova (2010). Our system can
be easily augmented with such additional filters,
which we leave for future work.