Language change is often depicted as a competition
between an entrenched variant, and an innovative,
rising competitor; e.g. the replacement of of course
by obviously (Tagliamonte and Smith, 2021) in
Present Day Canadian English, of werðan by becuman in Middle English (Petré and Cuyckens,
2008), of moult by beaucoup and très in Middle
French (Marchello-Nizia, 2000), of en par dans as
the chief locative preposition in Modern French
(Fagard and Combettes, 2013), or of the former
syntactic patterns for negation and interrogation by
the periphrastic do pattern (Kroch, 1989).
Such a competition, however, is difficult to evidence. For instance, what can the way construction
(Israel, 1996; Perek, 2018) (e.g. ’the Black Prince
plundered his way eastward to Narbonne and back’)
possibly replace? Moreover, in the case of a clear
replacement, the replacement is seldom total. For
instance, the periphrastic do did not replace auxiliaries, and some verbs like need are still found
with the older pattern; moult was replaced by two
different words, but they both show uses that moult
had not, and they do not cover the whole functional
range that was carried by moult. The French en
was replaced by dans in most locative contexts, but
it remains more frequent than its newer counterpart
(Eckart and Quasthoff, 2013; Corpus and language
statistics for corpora of the Leipzig Corpora Collection, 2021). Similarly, while be going to can
be seen as a competitor for will, both auxiliaries
differ semantically; furthermore, it has been argued
that they both feature semantic retention pertaining to their respective origins (Nicolle, 1998). The
same phenomenon has been observed for discourse
markers based on prepositional adverbs in French
(Fagard and Charolles, 2018).
In the meanwhile, it has been posited that frequency rise evidenced by lexical items or constructions is a sign of semantic expansion (Feltgen et al.,
2017). This hypothesis would provide a convenient account of the phenomena mentioned above:
language change is, first and foremost, a semantic
shift; if this semantic shift spills over the semantic
domain of an existing form, competition arises over
this overlap; if this semantic shift leads to meanings
and functions that were not formerly expressed in
the language, no competition occurs and there is
no competitor. In this sense, lexical competitions
are a sign of a semantic shift, and help identify
ongoing language changes; yet language change
may happen without any obvious competition.
In this paper, another perspective on the interplay
between semantic change and competition is offered. Indeed, competition may arise within a given
linguistic form dominion, especially in the case of
schematic constructions, that is, constructions that
feature an open slot that can be filled by different
arguments (e.g. the way too + {ADJ/ADV} intensifier construction). These arguments can compete
against one another, within the construction. Moreover, this competition needs not be one-to-one:
since a large number of arguments are involved,
the competition may unfold between different clusters of arguments. Therefore, we can detect such
paradigmatic competitions by looking at the correlations and anti-correlations between the frequency
dynamics of the different fillers.
To give a somehow hypothetical example of this
semantic shift at the paradigm level, we may consider the paradigm of classifiers (e.g. in Thai or
in Korean), which categorizes nouns according to
a set of principles. This categorization can, for
instance, be driven by considerations of shape, or
by considerations of function (Carpenter, 1992).
These two broad principles may in principle both
co-exist and compete over time, and individual
classifiers typically fall into one or the other broad
group of function-based classifiers and shape-based
classifiers (things being more blurry in practice).
In this regard, we can conceive of three levels of
semantic change, that are not mutually exclusive.
The first is the constructional level, which corresponds to a significant change in the broad scope
of the nouns to which the construction applies, for
instance through the recruitment of new classifiers
to operate on nouns that were previously beyond
the scope of the construction, e.g. the emergence
of a new classifier for the class of machines. The
second level is that of the individual classifiers; e.g.
the reanalysis of Thai /khan/ from a shape-based
classifier to a function-based one. The third level is
what I refer to as the ’paradigmatic level’. This happens when one group takes over the nouns that were
classified by the other group. Nouns become then
re-classified according to a new set of principles.
In this case, the individual classifiers do not have
to undergo semantic change; and the broad ’classifiers’ construction still applies to the same nouns.
Yet, these nouns are now preferentially categorized
in a new way (e.g. function over shape); therefore,
the properties that are made salient by the choice
of a specific classifier are now different. This kind
of paradigmatic reorganization is for instance illustrated by the different yet overlapping semantic
roles of verb classifiers in the related Nyulnyul and
Warrwa languages (McGregor, 2018).
This kind of semantic change only reveals itself
at the scale of a system of linguistic units, such as
constructional paradigms. As a result, traditional
tools, such as word embeddings that rely on collocations (Mikolov et al., 2013), cannot be readily
expected to account for it. In this paper, I offer a
simple method to detect such a paradigmatic reorganization. I illustrate it on the French quantifier
construction un N de (e.g. une profusion de), which
exactly mirrors the English quantifier construction
a N of (e.g. a lot of), whose historical development
has already been studied (Traugott and Trousdale,
2013). Besides the entrenchment of the construction in Middle French, I evidence, by looking at
the network of correlation between the fillers frequencies, a major paradigmatic shift occurring in
Modern French. A qualitative analysis of the competing clusters is also offered.
Language change, as it unfolds over several, interrelated levels of the linguistic organization, is inherently complex. To understand the diachronic
processes that a form or a construction participates
in, tracking its frequency soon faces drastic limitations: besides the S-curve pattern of entrenchment,
frequency is volatile and extremely variable, for noevident reason. Here, I have argued that we can
achieve a fine-grained understanding of the process
by looking at the interactions between the members
of a constructional schema. I have offered a computational method to track and visualize such interactions, a method that can be perfected and further
automatized, e.g. with the use of clustering algorithms. The picture that emerges remains highly
complex, but the large cluster-to-cluster competitions that the method can evidence may lead to a
fascinating linguistic insight into the fine-grained
processes of language change.
When considering schematic constructions, that
is, constructions that can host a variety of fillers,
similarly to an ecological niche, change can occur on three levels: 1) on the level of the individual fillers (whenever they undergo functional
change); 2) on the level of the construction, typically through the recruitment or loss of new fillers,
that is, through changes in its syntactic productivity (Sánchez-Marco and Evert, 2011); and finally
3) in the way the fillers are organized within the
construction, that is, on the paradigm level, leading to a new way to categorize the semantic space
on which the construction applies. Although all
three changes are expected to occur to an extent
in a given process, such a process can be better
characterized by one or the other of these changes.
All these changes are instances of semantic
shifts; while it is clear that the first two changes affect meaning (that of the individual filler in 1, that
of the construction as a whole in 2), the third kind
of change is less obvious. Yet, as it redefines the
categories in which the arguments of the construction are partitioned, it evidences different features
of these arguments. This kind of semantic shift is
especially prevalent when considering tight categories applying to a broad class of words, such as
determiners, classifiers, or auxiliaries. Examples
of this shift are the emergence of French demonstratives (Marchello-Nizia, 2006) or the change in
the auxiliaries in Old Spanish (Mateu, 2009).
In our example of the French paradigm of quantifiers, we have shown that the construction underwent a significant paradigmatic change in the
1801-1950 period. This paradigmatic change can
be related, at least on a qualitative level, to semantic considerations regarding the logic underlying
the different partitioning of nouns by the two competing clusters. Individual change does not seem
to play a large role in this picture, even though un
nombre de is more versatile than the other quantifiers and is likely to have undergone a semantic
shift. Constructional change does occur to some
extent (the nouns covered by the innovative cluster
do not all overlap with the nouns covered by the
entrenched cluster). Among the innovative quantifiers, those tied to a precise quantity such as une
douzaine de (’a dozen’) are the more likely to be
associated with new nouns, indicative of a semantic opening of the quantifier construction towards a
’measure’ meaning, while it was more closely associated to a ’count’ one (Unterbeck, 1994). This
latter change may also be due to an increasing proportion of scientific texts in the corpus. Yet, the remarkable cluster competition that unfolds throughout the nineteenth century is testimony enough that
the paradigm level is the most suited to understand
the change phenomenon in this period.
This study is a first step, an invitation to consider more systematically language change from a
systemic perspective, especially with the help of
automated tools, that are most needed to deal with
the intrinsic complexity of these systems. Although
the analysis presented here could be refined with
the use of a wider range of methods, I hope that
the results are intriguing enough to foster further
interest in changes unfolding on the paradigm level.